Recognition of facial emotion has been a challenge for many years. A real-time facial expression recognition system using deep learning technology can be used in applicationssuchasbiometricsecurity,intelligenthuman-computerinteraction,robotics, andclinicalmedicineforautism,depression,painandmentalhealthproblems. Classical approachestomachinelearningoftenrequireacomplexprocessofextractionoffeatures and produce poor results. In this thesis, we are applying the latest developments in deep learning to propose effective deep convolutional Neural Network (CNN) that can accurately interpret facially accessible semantic data without hand-designed feature descriptors. In order to learn CNNs with a strong classification power, we also apply different loss functions and training techniques. The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed networks outperform state-of-the-art techniques on the well-known FERC-2013 dataset provided by Kaggle facial expression recognition competition. The number of parameters in our proposed networks has drastically decreased, accelerating the performance speed and makes the proposed networks suitable for real-time systems.


The main objective of this research project is to build a facial emotion recognition model using Convolutional Neural Network that would Exactly identify the one of seven facial emotions (Happy, Sad, Fear, Surprise, Neutral, Angry, Disgust) used in the image file. The successful project implementation would help in automobile automations, diagnose diseases, track school attendance, Protect school from threats, Casinos, facilitates secure bank transactions, identity validation in banks and ATM, control access to secure areas in the industries and finally helps in mobiles to unlock the phone with better performance.

 We propose effective architecture of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to tackle the problem of facial emotion recognition. The proposed networks are composed of a stack of convolutional blocks. The first block contains 64 neurons with kernel size 3*3 and activation function as rectified linear unit (ReLu). Second block contains 128 neurons with kernel size 5*5 and contains 512 neurons. Activation function remains same for all blocks. Similarly, third and fourth block with neurons 512 and kernel size 3*3. Every layer is added with normalization layer and dropout layer with ratio of 0.25 to prevent overfitting. After convolutional blocks, flatten layer and two fully connected layers with neurons 256 and 512 was added with batch normalization and dropout layers. Finally, the dense output layer was added with seven classes and softmax function. Adam was used as optimizer with learning rate of 0.0001. The result obtained from the model is 65.42%. The model performs well on positive emotions with high precision for happy with 87% and surprise with 86%. Model performance seems weaker across negative emotions on average. In particularly, the emotion fear has a low precision of only 34% followed by angry, neutral and sad with 52%, 53% and 57% respectively. The model frequently misclassified angry, fear sad and neutral faces.
